---
title: 'New paper alert: A Strong Correlation Between Relativistic Electron Microbursts and Patchy Aurora'
date: 2021-09-14
permalink: /posts/2021/09/new-paper-20210914/
tags:
  - Paper
  - Precipitation
  - MeV
  - Aurora
---

New paper by Mike Shumko: A Strong Correlation Between Relativistic Electron Microbursts and Patchy Aurora.
====

Space is big - like really big, so trying to figure out how everything works can be difficult. Often in space physics we have issues with being able to have data across large energy ranges and locations. Sometimes we get lucky by being abel to use two different types of measurements taken from similar or the same location to get a better idea of how things all work together. That's the case for this newest paper by Mike Shumko [A Strong Correlation Between Relativistic Electron Microbursts and Patchy Aurora](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/share/DR5G58KABNSQT2PP7BWN?target=10.1029/2021GL094696). He and his team mates found an event where SAMPEX, a satellite looking at high energy electrons precipitating into the atmosphere, flew over an all sky camera which infers precipitation of auroral energy electrons. 

Now that might not seem all that exciting but... Typically we assume that the processes that cause lower energy (the ones that create the aurora) and the high energy elctron loss are *not* the same. But here was an event where Mike and his team saw both particle populations (the low and the high) being pushed down into the atmosphere at the same time and in the same location! So either there were *two* different drivers working on each of these particle poputlations or one driver that was causing both populations to be pushed into the atmosphere at the same time. Unfortunetly there were no observations of what the drivers might be, so more events need to be studied. 


While Mike was working on this paper, he also developed a cool new python library to load and analise the all sky camera data. If you want to check out this or other events, you can find it at https://zenodo.org/record/5483880#.YT-v555KjCU. 


Plain Language Summary
===
In this letter, we present a coordinated observation between a low Earth orbiting satellite, orbiting at 400 km altitude above Earth's surface, and an auroral all-sky imager in Canada. This observation showed a connection of a type of pulsating aurora, called patchy aurora, with extremely energetic and intense bursts of electron radiation called microbursts. This link is surprising because the electron energies responsible for auroral light are 100 times lower than the electrons that were directly observed in space. Our result implies that the mechanism responsible for patchy aurora and microbursts is likely the same, and could be capable of affecting electrons with vastly different energies. This result is a major step toward unifying the microburst and patchy aurora phenomena and shows that the dynamics of high-energy electrons located in near-Earth space can be intimately tied to much lower energy electron precipitation, and must therefore be studied together.

Citation
====
In text form
---
Shumko, M., Gallardo-Lacourt, B., Halford, A. J., Liang, J., Blum, L. W., Donovan, E., et al. (2021). A strong correlation between relativistic electron microbursts and patchy aurora. Geophysical Research Letters, 48, e2021GL094696. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL094696

In Bibtex
---
@article{https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL094696,

author = {Shumko, M. and Gallardo-Lacourt, B. and Halford, A. J. and Liang, J. and Blum, L. W. and Donovan, E. and Murphy, K. R. and Spanswick, E.},title = {A Strong Correlation Between Relativistic Electron Microbursts and Patchy Aurora},

journal = {Geophysical Research Letters},

volume = {48},

number = {18},

pages = {e2021GL094696},

keywords = {conjunction, microbursts, pulsating aurora, SAMPEX, THEMIS},

doi = {https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL094696},

url = {https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2021GL094696},

eprint = {https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2021GL094696},

note = {e2021GL094696 2021GL094696},

abstract = {Abstract In this letter, we present the results of a conjunction between the Solar Anomalous and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer (SAMPEX) satellite and a Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) all-sky imager in Gillam, Canada, showing a high correlation between relativistic,  MeV, electron microbursts and a type of pulsating aurora called patchy aurora. The correlation was 0.8, and is not serendipitous. While the relationship between pulsating aurora and 10–100s keV microbursts has been previously predicted, here we show a strong association between keV and MeV electron dynamics, possibly spanning two orders of magnitude. Importantly, this result shows that the dynamics of relativistic radiation belt electrons are at times intimately tied to keV electron precipitation, and cannot be studied in isolation.},

year = {2021}
}
